# COVID-related Android apps report

Author: `<<<AUTHOR_NAME>>>` (<<<AUTHOR_EMAIL>>>)
Created at: `<<<CREATED_AT>>>`
Report generated by the [covid-apps-observer][http://github.com/covid-apps-observer] project, version <<<ANALYZER_VERSION>>>

# Table of contents 

<<<TOC>>>

# Background

This report has been generated by the [covid-apps-observer][http://github.com/covid-apps-observer] project. The project automatically analyzes the apps by extracting information which is already publicly available either on the web or in the apps binary files. 

For independent verification, the raw data and the source code of the project is publicly available in its GitHub repository: [http://github.com/covid-apps-observer][http://github.com/covid-apps-observer] and its source code has been thoroughly commented in order to provide all the details about how the information provided in this report has been extracted. 

Any feedback, questions, and improvements about the project are very welcome, feel free to create an issue or pull request directly in its GitHub repository: [http://github.com/covid-apps-observer][http://github.com/covid-apps-observer].

## Data sources and analyses

The analysis is structured around five main dimensions: 
* App metadata  
* Requested permissions
* Mentioned servers
* Androwarn analysis
* User ratings and reviews

In the following we describe the data sources and analysis performed for each dimension.

### App metadata

App metadata includes an overview of the main information about the app (for example, its name, releases, privacy policy, etc.), contact information of the development team, and the various Android versions supported by the app. This information is extracted from two main data sources:
* _Google Play store_: we automatically mined the web page of the Google Play store showing the basic information about the app and we parsed it in order to extract information about the app and development team 
* _Android Manifest file_: in our analysis we decompiled the binary file of the app (it is similar to a Zip archive but it contains the code of the app instead of normal files) and we extracted information about the supported Android versions, as it has been listed by its development team.

The extracted app metadata feeds the _App overview_, _Development team_, and _Android support_ sections of this report.
We make use of the [google-play-scraper][https://github.com/JoMingyu/google-play-scraper] tool for extracting the raw data related to this dimension of the project.

### Requested permissions

The Android operating system has a permission model which allows users to grant access to potentially privacy-related information. Every Android app has to explictly declare the permissions it needs to properly function in the Android Manifest file.  

In this report we also show the protection level of each permission, which is a key information for understanding how the requested permissions related to the user's privacy. We carefully analyzed the [official Android documentation (v. 29)][https://developer.android.com/reference/android/Manifest.permission], and it resulted that a permission requested by an Android app can belong to the following protection levels:
* **Dangerous**: higher-risk permissions that would give a requesting app access to private user data or control over the device that can negatively impact the user. Because this type of permission introduces potential risk, the system usually does not automatically grant it to the requesting app. For example, any dangerous permissions requested by an app may be displayed to the user and require confirmation before proceeding.
* **Normal**: this is the default and most common level in Android; normal permissions are lower-risk and give access to isolated app-level features, with minimal risk to other apps, the system, or the user. 
* **Signature**: permissions granted only if the requesting app is signed with the same certificate as the app that declared the permission
* **Appop**: old permission level, a reminiscence of the App Ops tool that Google introduced in Android 4.3.
* **Development**: optional permissions which can be granted to development-oriented apps.
* **Privileged**: permissions who give higher power to mobile apps w.r.t. other apps, such as binding to incoming calls, interacting via bluetooth with other devices without user interaction, etc.
* **Preinstalled**: reserved only for preinstalled apps
* **Installer**: allow the holder to start the permission usage screen for an app
* **RetailDemo**: permissions related to devices used in demonstrations in shops.
* **Pre23**: permissions automatically granted to apps targeting devices running pre-6.0 Android.
* **Upcoming**: permissions which will be released in the next version of the Android platform. 
* **Deprecated**: permissions belonging to old releases of the Android platform, they should not be used by developers since they will not be supported in the near future.
* **Not for use by third-party applications**: permissions which can be requested only by apps developed by Google.
* **Undefined**: this protection level is not documented by Google.

The permissions dimension of this project is based on the [Androguard][https://github.com/androguard/androguard] static analysis tool.

### Mentioned servers

We decompiled each app in order to look for all possible mentions of remote URLs. The mentioned URLs can refer to remote servers the the app is using for either sending or receiving information, web addresses for directing the user to an information website, and so on. It is important to note that this analysis is not meant to be complete and it is very prone to obfuscation. The servers reported here are simply _mentioned_ somewhere in the code of the app and are meant to just give an indication about the "hooks" of the app towards external resources. For example, for an Android app it is normal to contact Google services in order to send/receive push notifications, or to contact the servers of analytics services for having real-time diagnostics about crashes of the app or bugs.

This part of the analysis is based on the [Androguard][https://github.com/androguard/androguard] static analysis tool for identfying the raw URLs mentioned in the app; then, the information about each mentioned server is collected by performing a _whois_ lookup on the first-level domain present in the URL.

### Security analysis

This dimension is based on the [Androwarn][https://github.com/maaaaz/androwarn] structural and data flow analysis of Android bytecode. Androwarn is developed by the University of Lyon/INSA (France) and it has been used in several academic studies. According to its documentation, Androwarn targets the following categories of malicious behaviour:
* **Telephony identifiers exfiltration**: IMEI, IMSI, MCC, MNC, LAC, CID, operator's name, etc.
* **Device settings exfiltration**: software version, usage statistics, system settings, logs, etc.
* **Geolocation information leakage**: GPS/WiFi geolocation, etc.
* **Connection interfaces information exfiltration**: WiFi credentials, Bluetooth MAC adress, etc.
* **Telephony services abuse**: premium SMS sending, phone call composition, etc.
* **Audio/video flow interception**: call recording, video capture, etc.
* **Remote connection establishment**: socket open call, Bluetooth pairing, APN settings edit, etc.
* **PIM data leakage**: contacts, calendar, SMS, mails, clipboard, etc.
* **External memory operations**: file access on SD card, etc.
* **PIM data modification**: add/delete contacts, calendar events, etc.
* **Arbitrary code execution**: native code using JNI, UNIX command, privilege escalation, etc.
* **Denial of Service**: event notification deactivation, file deletion, process killing, virtual keyboard disable, terminal shutdown/reboot, etc.

### User ratings and reviews

For this dimension we turn again to the web interface of the Google Play store. Firstly, we automatically mine summary statistics about user ratings from the web page of the app under analysis; then, we automatically download the newest 1000 reviews of the app under analysis. For each level of rating (5 stars, 4 stars, , etc., 1 star) we show the main topics discussed by end users in their reviews in the Google Play store. Those topics are collected in a simple frequentist manner and are meant to help both future users and the developers of the app in understanding what are the main positive and negative points of the app under analysis.

We make use of the [google-play-scraper][https://github.com/JoMingyu/google-play-scraper] tool for extracting the raw data related to this dimension of the project.

## Disclaimer 

This report has been produced independently of any parties and its only objective is to help anybody in better understanding how COVID-related apps work in practice (and compare to each other). The results of this report are limited to the specific version of the software used for running the analyses and on the various heuristics implemented in there. In other words, the results of the analyzers may differ depending on the time and modalities in which they are executed. We do not guarantee that the results of the analyses and the corresponding contents of this report are fully complete or correct. The analysis software is licensed under the [MIT License][https://github.com/iivanoo/covid-apps-observer/blob/master/LICENSE].

<<<APPS_REPORTS>>>

# Credits

This project makes use of the following main third-party projects:
* Androguard: [https://github.com/androguard/androguard][https://github.com/androguard/androguard]
* Androwarn: [https://github.com/maaaaz/androwarn][https://github.com/maaaaz/androwarn]
* google_play_scraper: [https://github.com/JoMingyu/google-play-scraper][https://github.com/JoMingyu/google-play-scraper]
* whois: [https://github.com/DannyCork/python-whois][https://github.com/DannyCork/python-whois]
* BeautifulSoup: [https://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup][https://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup]

Other open-source projects used in this project include: 
<<<REQUIREMENTS_CONTENTS>>>
